Good morning.
My name is Brian Tucker and
I am a manager in our
Wireless Software Engineering group.
Fundamentally,
I'm responsible pretty much for all
Bluetooth technologies on iOS platforms.
So this is CoreBluetooth 101.
This is not basket weaving,
so if you are looking for that,
you are in the wrong room.
CoreBluetooth 101 primarily is an
API that focuses on Bluetooth Low Energy,
which is a new technology that was
ratified by the Bluetooth standards body.
I believe at the end of 2010,
it was introduced in our
products last year with the
iOS 5 and with the iPhone 4S.
And why do we think it's
important to talk about this
technology with app developers?
Well, I think that Low Energy,
in the sense of Low Energy,
if you look at it from a
technology perspective,
really applies to every single
person in this room as a consumer,
but especially as a technologist.
I'll give you an example.
I was in China earlier this year
and I had the opportunity to speak
on this topic in China and it was
in front of about 2,000 people.
And in China, of course,
you have translators.
And I had never spoken to a group
of people with translators before.
And they were sitting over there in this
booth and they had put somebody in the
front row to tell me when to slow down.
Because like when you speak too fast,
the translator is going to slow down.
And when you speak too fast,
the translators are like machine guns.
You know, this stuff is just flying
out of their mouth,
right?
So they had this guy in the front.
He was flashing this flashlight at
me and he'd flash the flashlight
when I was talking too fast,
right?
So I'm watching my timer here and
I know how many slides I have left
and I realize there's no way I'm
going to get through the slides,
right?
So I look at him and he kind
of looks at me and we have this
Western showdown thing and he
realizes I'm not going to slow down,
right?
So at any moment, I'm going to slow down.
At any moment,
I'm pretty sure he's going to
throw the flashlight at me.
But we get through it.
I get done on time.
All the slides got done.
I'm sure the, you know,
the translators are ready to shoot me.
And so I walk down the stage
and I see the translator
running across the stage at me.
And I'm like, here it is.
I'm going to get killed
by this translator guy,
you know.
And he comes up to me and he says,
that was amazing.
You know, and I'm like, what?
And he's like, you know,
I never talked that fast in my life.
No.
And he said,
I'm going to go home today and
start working on this technology.
And I was like, wow, okay.
I didn't expect that, you know.
So it really does apply to everyone.
And so that's why we're
really excited about it.
So the topics in this
session are threefold.
So we have Bluetooth 4.0 low energy.
So this is kind of a 101
of Bluetooth low energy.
Hopefully, you'll come away from this
having at least some semblance
of what low energy can do.
Right?
Then we'll talk about core Bluetooth.
Now, core Bluetooth is our framework.
And if you don't know
what core Bluetooth is,
hopefully by the end of this,
you'll at least have some idea.
And then Joachim will go into this
in a lot more detail after lunch.
And then we'll actually give you a demo.
So we'll demo one of the
sample apps that we actually
have up on the developer site.
All right.
So let's get busy.
Bluetooth 4.0 low energy.
So I want you guys to consider this
as kind of your BTLE 101 class.
There will be a diploma at the end of it.
So stay through the whole session and
you'll be able to go make money on this.
No, seriously.
So some key concepts that
we'll be learning here.
Things like advertising,
concepts like device discovery,
connection management, what a service is,
what a characteristic is.
All that stuff we'll cover
in the next 20 or 30 minutes.
So what's the big idea
with Bluetooth Low Energy?
Well, most of you can probably
guess that the big idea with
Bluetooth Low Energy is this guy.
It's the 2032.
So for those of you that
don't know what this is,
this is your standard coin cell battery.
Works off of three volts.
They come in different capacities.
And the idea is that we
can now make accessories.
We can now make products.
Don't even call them accessories.
But we can make stuff
that runs on a really,
really cheap,
low energy or low power source battery.
And the iOS device can talk to it,
can have a conversation,
and it can provide information.
And you're like, okay, well,
that's kind of cool.
But what does it really mean?
What does it give to the consumer, right?
What's the big idea?
Well, we do it through three ways.
And it's really not rocket science here,
so don't expect any miracles.
But the first one is obviously
we spend less time in the air.
We spend less time communicating
between the two devices.
That's pretty obvious, right?
Well, in addition to that,
we send less data.
So anybody that's expecting to
do gigabit data rates on LE,
again, you can go find another session
because you're not going
to do that in Bluetooth 3.
And that's not its intention, right?
Bluetooth LE is intended
for very low power.
Remember,
we're going back to that coin cell.
And the coin cell is not going
to last more than a day if
you're constantly sending data
over and over and over again.
And finally, really,
LE is a whole new architecture.
So some people have asked me, well,
why can't I do LE on an iPhone 4?
Why can't I do LE on the old iPads?
And there really is a difference
at the fundamental level.
This is a different at the fundamental
level of the baseband itself,
of the radio, right, and the filer.
The timing is different.
The relationship between Bluetooth LE and
classic Bluetooth or basic rate,
enhanced data rate completely changes.
So with these three models,
we've defined this kind of
concept of Bluetooth Low Energy.
So let's compare it with what we
expect with classic Bluetooth.
So this is a chart, albeit simple,
but a chart that shows
you how much energy,
per se,
does it take to send an 8-byte packet.
And it's quite a bit of savings.
It's not quite 10x, but it's pretty good.
Now, it doesn't necessarily
always have to be like this.
As we see generational steps in
Bluetooth Low Energy devices,
we're seeing improvements in this,
actually.
And this is getting better
and better every day.
Sensitivity is going up.
The amount of power used to
send traffic is going down.
The devices are getting smaller,
all that kind of stuff.
Efficiency is improving.
But if we compare this
against actual data rates,
you can see that, well,
you can't send very much data on LE,
all right?
So you have to have a real expectation.
And in reality, this is theoretical.
If we take the actual, the real data,
it's actually much lower.
So in reality,
you're going to see about a 50 kbps
data rate with Bluetooth Low Energy.
And that's really pushing it.
That's downhill with a stiff
wind falling off a cliff.
Now, that's not easy.
And Bluetooth, we put 1200 there.
It could be better.
It could be -- we've seen 1700.
Gus will argue that we've seen better.
But 1200 is pretty realistic.
So you're just not going to
get a lot of data through LE.
So is that clear, hopefully?
I get that a lot.
All right.
So before we get into how it works,
I thought it would be really useful --
to maybe give you guys some use cases
on why we think LE is so exciting.
And remember I said at the beginning
that LE really does apply to everyone.
And I truly, honestly believe that.
There's this concept that's lived,
you know, in academic fields and in
certain industrial fields,
this concept of the Internet of Things,
right?
This concept that you have this
cloud of technology around you or
this cloud of devices around you,
and your device can start
interacting with those devices,
right?
Well,
we think LE really does enable that,
right?
Now, other radios to a certain
extent do it as well,
but LE really, really does.
It's simple.
It's easy to use.
It's low power, right?
So let's go through
some of these use cases.
So the first one,
and the one that I think
is really exciting,
is health care.
And health care and exciting,
I know that's kind of weird,
but health care is hugely useful.
It's a really good example
for Bluetooth Low Energy.
In fact,
the Continua Healthcare Alliance,
which is a consortium of companies
that have come together to kind of
create standards around health care,
they've actually standardized
around Bluetooth LE.
So that means, like, when you go to the
hospital and they have,
like, an EKG system,
or they're monitoring your heart rate,
or they're measuring your
blood levels or whatever,
all of those probes on your
body can all be LE and wireless,
right?
And it just goes on and on and on.
Stethoscopes, blood pressure cuffs,
I mean,
everything can be wireless now because
they can make a device that runs
off a battery that can literally
live on that battery for months,
and in some cases even years, right?
So another use case that's
really close to health care,
but it's not really health care,
is sports and fitness.
And this is an obvious low-hanging
fruit for Bluetooth Low Energy.
We're already seeing products
that use LE in this space today.
In fact, the heart rate monitor.
And there's a few companies,
Wahoo has one,
Polar has one that just came out.
In fact, my shoes right now have
LE sensors in them made by Nike.
So it's starting to become really,
really active in the sports and fitness,
and given the kind of conversations
we've had with companies,
it's just going to get bigger.
Security.
So most people don't think about this,
but consider your phone as
the key to your car or to
your office or to your home,
right?
With LE and the fact it's using AES-128
and you can create an encryption link
and you can do a defined key model
sharing between these two devices,
it's really,
really useful in security applications.
automation, and in this case,
home automation.
Now, I realize there's a lot of different
competing technologies in this space.
Smart energy seems to be focused
more on things like ZigBee and
some of these other technologies,
and those are great,
but Ellie clearly has a practical
use case in home automation,
and more specifically, if I, you know,
what's the one thing you always have,
right?
I have it in my back pocket right now.
It's your phone.
It's your iPhone,
so as you're walking around the
house and I walk into a room,
well, that room knows what I like, right?
It knows what the temperature should be.
It knows what the light should be, right?
It knows what the ceiling
fan should be on or not.
I mean, there's a lot of automation,
and that's just really simple stuff,
right?
So home automation.
And then something very closely
related to that is home entertainment,
right?
And this is another really obvious one,
but I think it's super exciting,
is that now your iPhone,
and not necessarily just your iPhone,
but your remote control can have
a two-way conversation with the
entertainment devices in your home.
Craigdooley,
Brian Tucker So if I go to Amazon and
I buy my new Blu-ray player or whatever,
or my Apple TV,
which is more appropriate,
it might have a conversation
with those two devices,
right?
It might immediately know, "Oh,
you just bought a Blu-ray player,
so clearly you can hit play," you know?
And it can even go beyond that.
And the Blu-ray itself could provide
information to the iOS device,
and it's just -- the sky's the limit when
it comes to LE and home entertainment.
Craigdooley, Brian Tucker The devices
can talk to each other,
you know?
Craigdooley, Brian Tucker So again,
start thinking about it as
it relates to doing the same
thing you're doing over a wire,
at least from a command
and control perspective,
over the wireless link, right?
Toys.
So as a father of two young kids,
this is huge for me, right?
And the reason I have children,
at least my wife would say,
is so that I can play with their toys.
And it's awesome, right?
So with LE,
it just -- the sky's the limit.
I mean, think about the fact that
you can go buy a toy,
and my kids already love the iPad.
So now the iPad extends to the toy.
And it's like it's a robot,
so they can program the robot
to do a bunch of things.
Or it's an interactive board
game that ties the board
game directly with the iPad,
right?
And they can do it,
and you guys can do it at a cost
that makes sense to the consumer.
It's not like they're having to go
out and spend $200 for a board game.
You know, the costs of these products are
actually getting lower and lower,
and LE is a huge part of that.
Pay systems.
So obviously there's other technologies
that resolve around pay systems
and NFC clearly is one of them,
but I would argue that
LE is actually really,
really good for this.
It's secure, it's localized,
it's easy to use.
Some fundamental things can
happen around LE and pay.
Time.
So with time services,
what do I mean by that?
Well, if you look around you,
there's clocks everywhere.
There's clocks in your car.
There's clocks on your microwave.
There's clocks in your
home entertainment system.
There's your alarm clock in your bedroom.
Some of you may even have VCRs.
If you do, you need help, but it may be,
you know, flashing a 12 on that thing.
Think about your phone.
Your phone always knows what time it is.
So as a time service model,
you can walk around your entire space and
be completely syncing all of your time,
right?
You go to a new place,
you walk into a hotel room,
the clock on the hotel room is wrong,
it instantly goes to the
time that you care about,
right?
Time services.
Doesn't sound like it's too exciting,
but for me, I would love it.
What do I mean by proximity?
Well, radio models are somewhat
good at determining distance,
right?
And we can do it through the
calculation of the propagation
of the signal across air,
and we know the signal level of
the receiver and the transmit
output power of the devices,
and we won't get into all that,
but the idea is that we can determine
that something else is near me,
right?
So when I walked into that
room and knows I'm in the room,
when I walk up next to my car,
my car just unlocks, right?
And it's based on security and proximity.
There's a ton of stuff
you can do with proximity.
In fact,
in the Advanced Core Bluetooth session,
we have a demo that's really cool that
Krav put together that does proximity,
and I won't spoil the fun.
It's really cool.
So that's some of the use
cases around Bluetooth LE,
and there's a bajillion more than this,
but hopefully you'll be able to see some
of the use cases around Bluetooth LE.
So that's some of the use
cases around Bluetooth LE,
and there's a bajillion more than this,
but hopefully this kind
of whets your whistle,
and it really gives you some ideas.
Oh, wow, LE really is useful.
There's really some
interesting use cases for this.
Okay, enough of that.
So let's get into some key terms.
The first one is this concept
of dual mode and single mode.
So what does this mean?
Dual mode is probably most of the
devices you are using right now.
I'm assuming all of you went out
and bought the new MacBook Pro,
MacBook Air, I doubt you have Macminis,
or an iPhone.
Those are all dual mode.
They can do both classic Bluetooth and
they can do Bluetooth Low Energy,
right?
Well,
a single mode device is exactly that.
It does one thing,
and in the case of this topic,
it does Low Energy.
That's all it does.
And so you will start to see
more single mode devices that can
interact with dual mode devices.
And single mode devices can
actually interact with other
single mode devices as well.
But as you see this described
in the spec and you see it
described in our documentation,
this will become -- hopefully now
you understand what that means.
So another key concept is nothing that
should be new to anybody in this room,
CES 101, but
[Transcript missing]
The concept here is the
server has some data.
Let's use the heart rate
monitor as an example.
So the heart rate monitor has my heart
rate strapped to my chest right now.
It's probably running
at 120 beats a minute.
: I'm going to die.
The client wants that data.
So my phone wants to know what I'm doing.
Right?
So this is a really basic concept.
So if we look at this as it relates
to the Bluetooth definition of this,
you have this concept called peripheral
and this concept called central.
I didn't make up these names.
This is not something I did.
Central, not sure I like the name,
but we're stuck with it.
That's in the spec.
So as you would imagine,
these are the devices that would
be a central or a peripheral.
[Transcript missing]
So to make it a little bit more real,
I thought it would be useful
to explain to you that this is
actually what's happening is
that your peripheral is actually
advertising on multiple frequencies.
There's actually 40 frequencies
within the Bluetooth LE spectrum,
2 megahertz wide,
and within those intervals we have
these three advertising channels.
And what's happening is that that
device is broadcasting on channel 37,
38, 39 with a little gap in between.
So what's happening is the scanner,
the observer, the iPhone in this case,
is listening on one channel,
and we see that packet.
And then it's doing it again,
advertising on three packets,
and we're scanning on that channel,
and we're listening on that packet.
So it's really, really important for your
accessories to be using all
of your advertising channels.
Really,
really important for discovery time.
And guess what?
There's that advertising interval again,
right?
And the advertising interval,
hopefully you can start to see why
advertising interval is directly
related to how quickly your app can
discover a Bluetooth LE accessory,
right?
All right, so let's talk about
setting up the connection.
So now that we've discovered the device,
now that we know it's out there,
my heart rate monitor is advertising,
my phone wants to talk to it,
what happens?
Well, it's advertising, we're scanning,
we see that device, it's really simple.
All we do is we turn that around
and we send a connection interval.
I'm sorry, a connection request.
And the connection request
goes back to the accessory,
it accepts,
and something magical happens.
These two devices now become
central and peripheral.
The peripheral is the
device that was advertising,
and the central is the device that wants
to talk to that advertising peripheral,
okay?
And at this point, they're just going to
start exchanging data.
Pretty basic, okay?
Now, if we look at how we send data,
there's another key term here that
you guys should burn in your brain,
and that's connection interval.
So if we look at how these
devices are communicating,
the central says, hey,
do you have any data in the peripheral?
And the peripheral says, yep,
here's some data.
And then again, hey,
do you have any data?
Yep, here's some data.
Do you have any data?
And if it doesn't have any data, it says,
nope, I don't have any.
And it's actually a little bit
more complicated than that,
but you get the concept.
Now guess what?
That connection interval is the interval
at which you can send one set of data
and then send the next set of data
and then send the next set of data,
right?
And the reason it does this is because
it can't just constantly be transmitting.
Again, we go back to the original idea
and that was the coin cell battery,
right?
So if we have to have an interval
to how we communicate because,
again, we're trying to save power,
the connection interval, guess what,
directly ties to how fast
you can send the data,
right?
Because we can't send a whole lot
of data in one particular packet.
Let's just say it's, you know,
20 or so bytes.
Now you can start to see why LE is
not designed for high bandwidth,
okay?
Now you can send multiple sets of data
within a single connection interval.
In this case, I sent two.
And that just can continue
within that connection interval.
But again,
this directly ties to your battery life.
I think I've harped on that enough.
Topology.
So let's talk about
topology for a minute.
So two key concepts.
The first is this concept of advertising,
okay?
So the advertiser,
the broadcaster can advertise
to multiple observers.
So if I had my heart rate
monitor belt on right now,
every single one in this room
could see all that advertising.
If, for example,
somewhere on the wall is a thermostat
and it advertises temperature,
every single one in this room
could see all that advertising.
If, for example,
somewhere on the wall is a thermostat
and it advertises temperature,
every single one in this room
could see all that advertising.
Everybody in this room would know
what the temperature of the room is,
right?
Some really powerful things can
happen with this kind of topology.
A plant soil moisture device in my
backyard could be broadcasting a
little bit of information in the
advertising packet that tells every
device in my home what's going on,
right?
A plant soil moisture device in my
backyard could be broadcasting a
little bit of information in the
advertising packet that tells every
device in my home what's going on,
right?
So that's that topology.
And then once we're connected,
a peripheral can only be
connected to one central.
Now, a central can be connected
to multiple peripherals,
and certainly we allow that within iOS.
And then one exception to this is that,
in iOS at least,
you can have multiple centrals
connected to your peripheral.
We don't make that limitation
within our product.
So that's topology.
So what's the data look like?
How do we exchange information?
Well, two main concepts-- services
and characteristics.
Services are a description
of the set of data.
So pull out your XML hat for a minute
and think of it in terms of this tree.
So if we have this
definition of a server,
and we have this service
within that server,
and we're going to call
it our heart rate monitor.
So this polar belt has this
definition of information.
And there's a standard for this,
actually,
that's in the Bluetooth standards
body on how to do this.
But this service is
called heart rate monitor.
Well,
there could be multiple characteristics
that relate to that service.
And in this case, we have two.
And there's more than that.
But in this case, there's two.
The first one is pretty
obvious-- my heart rate.
But the next one might
be less than obvious,
but really useful is where is it?
Is it on my wrist?
Is it on my chest?
Is it on my neck?
And that may change the telemetry aspects
of the data recording for heart rate,
especially in healthcare.
So that's kind of the basics of
a server and characteristics.
So let's tear down a characteristic.
What does that consist of?
So the first thing is the type.
Now, this is a key point.
It has a UUID,
or Universal Unique Identifier.
Everything in LE,
everything in CoreBluetooth
is based on UUIDs.
And Joachim will go into more detail
on exactly how to generate them and
why they're important and what's the
difference between a Bluetooth standard
UUID versus one that you generate.
One is 16-bit, one is 128-bit,
that kind of stuff.
But this identifies this characteristic.
Second is value.
Now, we don't type the value.
We don't say this is a string or this
is a byte or an integer or whatever.
It's just a blob to us.
We take it from the server
and we hand it to the app.
Right?
We take it from the app and
we hand it to the accessory.
Right?
There's some properties
about the characteristic.
Can we read to it?
Or can we read from it?
Can we write to it?
Can this support notifications?
Notifications are kind of cool because
what you can do in Client Config is
you can turn on notifications for
characteristics that support it.
And the server will
automatically feed you updates.
So you don't have to keep saying,
"Do you have any data?
Yeah?
Do you have any data?
Yeah?" You know, it's more efficient.
And then finally, there's descriptors or
additional descriptors,
and it's completely up to you.
Keep in mind that LE is loosely
defined as it relates to a
set of standards or profiles.
Much unlike Bluetooth in general.
And you can go and completely define
your own implementation of LE.
These shoes, for example,
aren't using standard profiles.
But the heart rate belt is.
And with your app in iOS,
you can do either.
So remember when I said
it's kind of like a tree?
So this is just a visual
representation of that.
My peripheral can have multiple services,
and my services can have
multiple characteristics.
It's really, really basic.
All right?
So that gives you a
sense of how this works.
So hopefully that was a
whirlwind tour of Bluetooth LE.
And there's a whole lot
more about this technology.
If you are having sleep problems,
go and get the spec.
Read it for about 10 minutes
and then you'll be asleep.
But everything I talked about is
in the Bluetooth 4.0 core spec.
Pretty much everything you
need to know is in there.
But good luck.
All right,
so let's get into core Bluetooth.
CoreBluetooth is the representation
of LE on our iOS platforms.
It's the framework that you
use in your apps to talk to
accessories and to host peripherals,
right?
We have three primary core principles.
So the first one is we
want it to be simple.
So when we started writing this,
we probably rewrote it
I don't know how many times.
We kept realizing it's too complicated.
It's too complicated.
It's too many objects,
too many variables, too many interfaces.
So we kept fighting on
ourselves to make this simple,
to make this easy to approach.
But at the same time,
we didn't want to limit
you in what you could do.
We didn't want you to go, ah,
this is a baby framework.
Nobody can use this.
So we wanted it to be really,
really powerful.
That was really hard.
So hopefully what we have in
Core Bluetooth has done that.
Some people would argue that we have.
Some would say we haven't.
But we feel like that it's the great
intersection between being both powerful,
giving you the features that you need,
but at the same time not requiring
you to get a PhD in Core Bluetooth.
And then finally,
we wanted to build it on the standard.
We wanted you to be able to go and
look at the standard and then come
and look at Core Bluetooth and go,
oh, okay, that's what a central is.
Because it says right
here in the core spec,
that's what a peripheral is.
So it ties into the spec itself.
And we've been just fanatical in
making sure that we're as close
as we possibly can to the spec.
There is a couple of embellishments.
but for the most part, it's spec-based.
So what's unique about CoreBluetooth and
what's different between Bluetooth per se
is that it's really all about your app.
It's nothing to do with the OS.
In fact,
with the exception of paired devices
showing up in the Bluetooth settings,
there's nothing in the OS that has
anything to do with LE except maybe
the little Bluetooth icon that lights
up when you have a device connected.
And the reason we wanted to
do it this way is that we,
again, didn't want to shoehorn you guys
into specific implementations.
We wanted to give you the power
to go and innovate on all of
these accessories tied to those
use cases that I just showed you,
right?
So it's really all about you guys,
which means that your app is
responsible for everything.
It's responsible for discovery,
connecting to the device,
exchanging data.
So we're going to talk about persistent,
persisting the device.
A lot of people don't realize
that they have to store the
device because we don't store it.
So they need to persist that information,
the UID of that particular device.
That is all in your app,
and most app developers will love that.
Some don't.
There's other OSes for that.
So what can you do this on?
Where does this work?
So the first one, of course,
was the iPhone 4S.
This kind of started it all.
This was the first 4.0 capable device
that had a Bluetooth 4.0 radio in it.
Next came along was the
Mac Mini and the Macbook Air.
We just introduced the iPad in
the spring of this year and the
iPad now has 4.0 capabilities.
I mentioned the Macbook Air.
One that didn't make it on to this deck
because of the timing is all of our
Macbook Pros now support Bluetooth 4.0.
So the new -- pretty much all
the new Macbook Pros that we
introduced yesterday -- well,
all of them support Bluetooth 4.0.
So pretty much any device that
your customers are going to
use in a portable setting are
going to support Bluetooth 4.0,
which is pretty cool.
That means in the home,
the devices in the home
can interact with the Mac.
Mac Mini and when you're on the road,
the Mac -- the iPhone 4S and the
iPad can all interact with your app,
right, and with your accessories.
But there's another one here that
I haven't included because I haven't
clicked the button is the iOS simulator.
And we think this is really cool
because especially with iOS 6
because now -- let's say you have
an idea and it -- I don't know.
I don't want to make it a big deal.
I don't want to make up one right now.
But you have an idea,
and you have an accessory,
and you have an app,
and you want to make this
kind of ecosystem where your
app talks to the accessory.
What's cool about the simulator is that
you can do both the peripheral side and
the central side completely in house.
So if you're not a hardware company,
fine,
but you can still do the peripheral,
the interaction with it and
just make up the data or tie
it to some external stimulus,
right,
and completely develop your solution
all within the iOS simulator.
And then when you're ready,
then go and deal with your
hardware manufacturer,
and if you are a hardware manufacturer,
now develop the firmware, right,
that actually sits inside the
single-mode device to do all this.
Super, super efficient.
And you never had to
touch a piece of hardware.
So it's really, really great, right?
You can debug.
You can do everything
within the simulator.
Framework.
So there's a lot of acronyms up there,
but all you have to really focus on
for your applications is the top two,
your app and Core Bluetooth.
We have all of these technologies
in our products like GATT and AT and
LTCAP and GAP and all these acronyms
that everybody loves to throw out.
But you don't have to worry about it.
So we're encapsulating this within
Core Bluetooth so that you don't have
to worry about being an at expert.
And that's just me you don't want to be.
So that's our framework.
So I had showed you this slide before,
but I'm going to show you this
because I want you to understand
kind of the relationship between the
peripheral and the central because I'm
going to show you the object model.
And if you understand this,
I think it will click.
So now that you guys have seen that,
let's look at our primary objects.
So we have CB central manager,
Core Bluetooth central manager,
which is the object that you use
to manage peripherals or devices.
And CB peripheral,
which is the representation of the device
that you either have discovered for
advertising or that you are connected to.
Now, we have some data objects,
CB service, Core Bluetooth service
and characteristic.
And unsurprisingly,
these are exactly the same names
that I just described to you when
we talked about Bluetooth LE.
Right?
And then finally we have a helper object,
CB UUID,
not to be confused with CFUUIDRef.
And then we have a core Bluetooth UUID.
I don't know how many
times that's happened.
But this is a representation
of the Core Bluetooth UUID.
And the reason this is there is, again,
I go back to the point that every
single thing in LE is based on a UUID.
So we figured we'd make it
easy for you and pass these
objects around rather than big,
long strings.
But in iOS 6,
we added a whole new set of classes.
Now, we're going to go into a whole lot
of detail on this in the next hour.
But I wanted to give
you a little sneak peek.
So with the development of a peripheral,
we now have the opposite side and we
have this thing called a peripheral
manager and consequently the central and
we have these concepts called mutable
services and mutable characteristics.
I'll just leave that there
but that's how we define,
guess what,
services and characteristics in your app.
And then, of course,
attribute or at request.
That's a little esoteric.
But it will make a lot
more sense as we go on.
I don't have enough time to get into
these in a lot of detail but again,
this afternoon.
: Real quick,
I wanted to mention backgrounding.
So a lot of questions
around backgrounding.
There's two primary ways
that you can background your
app and talk to accessories.
The first one we call
event-based backgrounding.
And
We feel like event-based
background is the most efficient
way that you can develop an app
on iOS and talk to accessory.
[Transcript missing]
So that's why we created
session-based notification or
session-based backgrounding.
And in session-based backgrounding,
pretty much you can do anything
you want with the accessory.
It's full access to the peripheral.
You can scan for peripherals.
There are some limits.
You can connect to the peripheral,
you can exchange data
with the peripheral,
pretty much anything that you
could do in the foreground,
you can do in the background.
There are some limits because of power.
The only thing that we ask
is that you use this concept
of discrete start and stop.
This concept that I'm going to,
for example, my heart rate monitor,
I'm going to go for a run,
and in that run,
my heart rate monitor talks to my app on
my phone and they have a conversation.
It's like slow down, speed up, whatever,
right?
So it has to monitor it in real time.
We get that.
But if I'm just sitting
there programming,
I probably don't need to be
monitoring my heart rate.
Some of you do, but it's not that useful,
right?
So we really try to encourage
this start and stop model within
session-based backgrounding.
Okay, so that's a really,
really brief overview of CoreBluetooth.
Now, we'll get into a lot more
detail again this afternoon.
I know I keep harping that.
But we just couldn't cover
this all in one session,
so that's why we have two.
And Joachim will go into
a lot more detail on this.
But what I'd like to do now
is invite up Craig Dooley,
and he's going to give you a demo
of the heart rate monitor actually
working with the MacBook Air.
So, Craig?
Morning.
Thank you, Brian.
So at this point,
you have a pretty good understanding
of how Bluetooth Low Energy works,
but I want to give you a quick
demo and show you what it really
takes to put this in your app.
So I have one of these
Polar heart rate belts.
You can just go buy these from Amazon.
And I've got a demo application here.
So we can just launch this,
look for our device.
And now we're connected and
in just a second we should be
seeing real-time heart rate data.
As you can see, I'm very excited to be
talking to you about this.
So what did we actually do?
As Brian said,
you can define your own services
and characteristics that contain
any type of data you want.
But in this case, we're going to talk to
a standardized profile.
And this is the heart rate profile.
So we just have a couple of defines here.
We're going to define the service and the
two characteristics that we care about.
And if you're interested in this,
you can go to the Bluetooth developer
portal at developer.bluetooth.org.
So now that we know what kind
of data we're looking for,
let's start our app.
So the first thing we're going to
do is we're going to instantiate
a CB central manager object.
And this represents your local device.
This is how you're going to
perform all the interactions
against your local radio.
Things like I want to start
observing devices as they come
by and I want to connect to them.
So we're going to pass in
ourself as the delegate.
We're going to pass in nil for the queue,
which will choose the best queue for us,
in this case, the main queue.
And now we can get started with our app.
So when we started, we had no idea what
devices were around us,
no previous interactions
with this device.
So the first thing we're gonna
do is we're gonna call Scan for
Peripherals with service.
And there could potentially
be a lot of things around you.
Like Brian said,
there could be thermostats,
there could be soil moisture sensors.
But in this case,
we only care about heart rate monitors.
So we're gonna pass in an array.
And we're gonna say we only
care about heart rate monitors.
And then this will tell
the system and the radio,
start looking for devices that
are advertising that service.
And when we find one,
we'll get this callback.
Central Manager,
so just gives you a handle to the
Central Manager that you're using,
did discover Peripheral with
advertising data and RSSI.
The Peripheral is your handle
to talk to the remote device.
The advertising data can contain
a couple different things.
It contains what services
that device supports,
a friendly name in case you want
to show something in your UI,
what power the device is advertising at,
and also RSSI, which gives you the signal
strength that you saw that device.
So if you want to do
something with proximity,
this is how you can tell
approximately how close your
device is based on how much of the
signal was lost in transmission.
In our case,
we don't want to do proximity,
so all we're going to do is add this
to the list that we showed of devices.
Once we've decided that's
the device we want,
all we have to do is
call CB Central Manager,
connect to peripheral.
Or connect peripheral.
Now, a cool thing about this is this
won't time out for you automatically.
So if you want to do something
like home automation or security,
you can actually have your
list of devices and just say,
I want to connect to this device,
and minutes, hours, even days later when
someone walks close to you,
as soon as the radio sees this device,
you'll actually have a connection.
After we connect,
you get central manager,
did connect peripheral.
And at this point, we have the two-way
communication with the device.
So we want to start
interacting with that data.
You'll remember that everything
is in the structure of
services and characteristics.
So the first thing we have to do
when we connect to the device is
discover the services on that.
So we're going to say,
I want to be the delegate
for this service.
And then we're just going to ask,
discover all the services on the device.
After that goes out over the air,
it's going to find all those services,
and there could potentially
be a lot on the device,
things like the device name,
device information could have
a vendor ID and product ID.
It could have the current battery level.
But for this app, it's really simple.
All we care about is heart rate.
So we're going to iterate over all
the services on that peripheral.
And if we find a heart rate service,
which is the one that we care about,
we're going to discover all the
characteristics underneath that service.
Again, this will go over the air.
And after it's done,
you'll get peripheral,
did discover characteristics for service,
and potentially an error.
If you remember from Brian's other slide,
heart rate monitor can
contain a couple things.
All we really care about for this
demo is we want the current heart
rate measurement and potentially
the body sensor location.
So for heart rate,
it's not something we really
want to pull this data.
We don't want to sit
there and ask the device,
"What is it now?
What is it now?" So we're
going to say peripheral,
set notify to yes on that characteristic,
and then whenever the heart rate
monitor has new data to send,
it'll just deliver that to us.
and for body sensor location,
I'm not going to be moving around a lot,
so I only need to read that once.
So in this case,
we'll call peripheral read
value for characteristic.
And both of those are actually going to
call back on the same delegate method.
Peripheral did update
value for characteristic.
So whether it's because you asked
for it or whether the device
is just giving you new data,
whenever there's something
updated on that characteristic,
this is the callback you'll get.
And then we can do
whatever we want with it.
So the characteristic gives us
back a blob of data in NSData.
If it's heart rate measurement,
we're going to update
the current display.
If it's body sensor location,
we can do what we want with it.
And that's really all we have to do to
connect and interact with the device.
So this application is actually available
as sample code on the developer site,
and I can't wait to see all the
apps you guys are going to write.
Thank you.
Thank you, Craig.
And that's available now,
so you guys can go download this
literally right after this session.
Skip your lunch because
you want to do this.
Trust me.
These heart rate belts are available now.
In fact, we bought these on
Amazon like this weekend.
So you can grab these.
And it's a great way to actually
start developing is to grab a
real accessory and start working
with that accessory immediately.
One thing I wanted to comment
on our best practices,
we have a lot of really great stuff
in our Bluetooth Guidelines document.
Now, this location that I have up there
is the Guidelines document that's
pretty much available to the world.
You guys, because you're here at WWDC and
you're Apple developers,
have access to the
latest release of this,
which is our release six,
that you'll see on your developer
portal for iOS and Mac developers.
So definitely go check that out.
Another thing you should
be reading tonight,
along with the course spec,
to help you sleep.
But no, there's a lot of really
great stuff in there.
We talk about advertising intervals.
We talk about connection intervals.
We talk about all the new stuff
we've done with Peripheral Manager,
as well as all the
stuff around Bluetooth.
We have a bunch of people here
to help you along the way.
These two guys,
Steven Schick and Craig Keithley,
they are awesome.
And they are here to help
you develop your products,
both software and hardware.
They have expertise pretty
much across the board,
and these guys really,
really care about you and your products.
Developer programs, obviously,
you can check out our MFI programs.
We do have a mailing list.
We also have developer forums now.
So we have entries in
our developer forums.
And there's also a site
not related to Apple,
but definitely related to LE,
and that's developer.bluetooth.org.
And if you're curious about all
the standard IDs or all the UUIDs,
definitely go check them out.
Because all of those are
there for you as reference.
In fact, Craig commented on that in,
I think, one of his comments in his code.
And that's really, really useful.
I keep mentioning this other session.
Here it is, Advanced Core Bluetooth.
This is just after lunch at 2:00 PM.
You don't want to miss it.
Joachim has a ton of data that
takes what I said and just adds--
it compounds on this and adds a
ton more meat to-- and tips and
tricks and things that we've learned
working with you over the last year.
And I think that's really,
really important.
And I think it's really important for
us to be able to work with you and to
be able to work with you in the future.
So with these devices,
our portable products, right, our iPhone,
our iPads, our MacBooks,
You know,
it's really about the use cases.
It's about the experiences that
your customers have using these
products in your applications.
And it's really amazing now,
to me at least,
that we've come into this world,
this environment,
where we can literally start to
connect all of these different models.
We really can create
that Internet of Things.
And we can do it in a practical,
real way.
It's not theoretical.
It's not someday we'll get this protocol,
but let us do it.
We feel right now with
Bluetooth LE and Core Bluetooth that
we can actually do this now.
And you guys can make just crazy stuff.
So fundamentally, connect the world.
Connect devices,
connect accessories to your
apps through our iOS devices,
through our Mac devices.
And we just absolutely cannot wait
to see what you guys come up with.
So thank you very,
very much for allowing me to talk to you.
Enjoy the rest of the week.
Have a great week.